Thank you to the citizens of Berlin and to the people of Germany. 
Let me thank Chancellor Merkel and Foreign Minister Steinmeier for welcoming me earlier today. 
Thank you Mayor Wowereit, the Berlin Senate, the police, and most of all thank you for this welcome. 
I come to Berlin as so many of my countrymen have come before. Tonight, 
I speak to you not as a candidate for President, 
but as a citizen – a proud citizen of the United States, and a fellow citizen of the world. 
I know that I don’t look like the Americans who’ve previously spoken in this great city. 
The journey that led me here is improbable. 
My mother was born in the heartland of America, but my father grew up herding goats in Kenya. 
His father – my grandfather – was a cook, a domestic servant to the British. 
At the height of the Cold War, my father decided, like so many others in the forgotten corners of the world, 
that his yearning – his dream – required the freedom and opportunity promised by the West. 
And so he wrote letter after letter to universities all across America until somebody, 
somewhere answered his prayer for a better life. 
That is why I’m here. And you are here because you too know that yearning. 
This city, of all cities, knows the dream of freedom. 
And you know that the only reason we stand here tonight is because men and women from both of our nations came together to work,
 and struggle, and sacrifice for that better life. 
Ours is a partnership that truly began sixty years ago this summer, 
on the day when the first American plane touched down at Templehof. 
On that day, much of this continent still lay in ruin. 
The rubble of this city had yet to be built into a wall. 
The Soviet shadow had swept across Eastern Europe, 
while in the West, America, Britain, and France took stock of their losses, and pondered how the world might be remade. 
This is where the two sides met. 
And on the twenty-fourth of June, 1948, the Communists chose to blockade the western part of the city. 
They cut off food and supplies to more than two million Germans in an effort to extinguish the last flame of freedom in Berlin. 
The size of our forces was no match for the much larger Soviet Army. 
And yet retreat would have allowed Communism to march across Europe. 
Where the last war had ended, another World War could have easily begun. All that stood in the way was Berlin. 
And that’s when the airlift began – 
when the largest and most unlikely rescue in history brought food and hope to the people of this city. 
The odds were stacked against success. 
In the winter, a heavy fog filled the sky above, 
and many planes were forced to turn back without dropping off the needed supplies. 
The streets where we stand were filled with hungry families who had no comfort from the cold. 
But in the darkest hours, the people of Berlin kept the flame of hope burning. 
The people of Berlin refused to give up. And on one fall day, 
hundreds of thousands of Berliners came here, to the Tiergarten, 
and heard the city’s mayor implore the world not to give up on freedom. “There is only one possibility,” he said. 
“For us to stand together united until this battle is won…The people of Berlin have spoken. 
We have done our duty, and we will keep on doing our duty. 
People of the world: now do your duty…People of the world, look at Berlin!” 
People of the world – look at Berlin! 
Look at Berlin, where Germans and Americans learned to work together and 
trust each other less than three years after facing each other on the field of battle. 
Look at Berlin, where the determination of a people met the generosity of the Marshall Plan 
and created a German miracle; where a victory over tyranny gave rise to NATO, 
the greatest alliance ever formed to defend our common security. 
Look at Berlin, where the bullet holes in the buildings 
and the somber stones and pillars near the Brandenburg Gate insist that we never forget our common humanity. 
People of the world – look at Berlin, where a wall came down, a continent came together, 
and history proved that there is no challenge too great for a world that stands as one. 
Sixty years after the airlift, we are called upon again. History has led us to a new crossroad, 
with new promise and new peril. 
When you, the German people, tore down that wall – a wall that divided East and West; 
freedom and tyranny; fear and hope – walls came tumbling down around the world. 
From Kiev to Cape Town, prison camps were closed, 
and the doors of democracy were opened. Markets opened too, 
and the spread of information and technology reduced barriers to opportunity and prosperity. 
While the 20th century taught us that we share a common destiny, 
the 21st has revealed a world more intertwined than at any time in human history. 
Today, I am ending one journey to begin another. 
After serving the people of Illinois in the United States Senate — 
one of the highest honors and privileges of my life — 
I am stepping down as senator to prepare for the responsibilities I will assume as our nation’s next president. 
But I will never forget, and will forever be grateful, 
to the men and women of this great state who made my life in public service possible.
More than two decades ago, I arrived in Illinois as a young man eager to do my part in building a better America. 
On the South Side of Chicago, 
I worked with families who had lost jobs and lost hope when the local steel plant closed. 
It wasn’t easy, but we slowly rebuilt those neighborhoods one block at a time, 
and in the process I received the best education I ever had. 
It’s an education that led me to organize a voter registration project in Chicago, 
stand up for the rights of Illinois families as an attorney and eventually run for the Illinois state Senate.
It was in Springfield, in the heartland of America, 
where I saw all that is America converge — farmers and teachers, businessmen and laborers, 
all of them with a story to tell, all of them seeking a seat at the table, 
all of them clamoring to be heard. 
It was there that I learned to disagree without being disagreeable; 
to seek compromise while holding fast to those principles that can never be compromised, 
and to always assume the best in people instead of the worst. Later, 
when I made the decision to run for the United States Senate, 
the core decency and generosity of the American people is exactly what I saw as I traveled across our great state — 
from Chicago to Cairo; from Decatur to Quincy.
I still remember the young woman in East St. Louis who had the grades, 
the drive and the will but not the money to go to college. 
I remember the young men and women I met at VFW halls across the state who serve our nation bravely in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
And I will never forget the workers in Galesburg who faced the closing of a plant they had given their lives to, 
who wondered how they would provide health care to their sick children with no job and little savings.
Stories like these are why I came to Illinois all those years ago, 
and they will stay with me when I go to the White House in January. 
The challenges we face as a nation are now more numerous and difficult than when I first arrived in Chicago, 
but I have no doubt that we can meet them. For throughout my years in Illinois, 
I have heard hope as often as I have heard heartache. Where I have seen struggle, 
I have seen great strength. And in a state as broad and diverse in background and belief as any in our nation, 
I have found a spirit of unity and purpose that can steer us through the most troubled waters.
It was long ago that another son of Illinois left for Washington. 